Um, we've got your written submission o with regards
to the, uh, return the claim settlement bill.
Um, and we have five minutes allocated as per usual.
So, Craig, you use it, has you see fit?
Got, thank you. First of all, I'd just like
to acknowledge, uh, that the, the place from the mountains,
the hills down to the rivers, to, for to the people,
the people of, uh, the past and the people of the present,
and the people going forward of the young people, which is,
it is what these treaty claims fundamentally, uh, fail.
Uh, I think, uh, once again,
I think the value is the disgrace.
I think probably, uh, if you look around the committee
and you all, uh, add up
how much you've all been paid over years
and stuff, you're probably more of what the 5 million
that you're offering, uh, to the, to, to the local, uh,
people for, for the claim.
Uh, I, I don't think it, it's a, uh, a, a fair offer,
uh, as the processes of all of them are.
Uh, which I think when we, we look at what, uh, o Otherwi
and Harper were sort of, uh,
after reflecting, uh, that they,
what they're forced into at the time, then later on,
then they, they have regrets and so forth.
Uh, a lot of reserve land that you pass back
and stuff is, uh, is very, uh, financially limited,
uh, and often comes, uh, a as a liability
with expenses and so forth.
Uh, so it's, mm-hmm.
You could say it's clearing the box for the crown, uh,
you know, and just pa just passing
what liabilities are back, back, uh, to, to ma Uh,
we ne we never see them being handed back, uh, financially,
uh, viable land, uh, and, and so forth.
But yeah, I, I think the numbers speak for itself
and so forth and,
and I, I, I would say like, uh, I've been to quite a few
of these, uh, treaty claim meetings now.
Uh, I think Adrian had agree with that.
Uh, and, uh, I, I never see a bunch
of white people sitting in a room.
I just see a bunch of hardworking people of color, uh,
that's, that's, uh, been misrep by, by, by the crown.
Uh, and it's just in the, the fundamentals
of the commonwealth in, at the Commonwealth is collected
for the better good of the view,
and it's of the means of the people of the country.
That's, uh, you, you know, we, we, we colonize or colonize
and, uh, so forth.
So yeah, so, but I don't really, uh, support it, I suppose,
what the locally we finally decides on,
but, uh, it's, it is by accepting these claims
and so forth that we just rubber a stamp, uh,
what the actions of the Crown are.
So that's what my views are.
Thanks, Craig. Any, any, uh, points
of clarity or questions of Craig?
Anyone? I think, uh, Craig,
you're very consistent with your message.
We, we've heard it before. We'll hear it again.
And, uh, once again, I thank you for your written submission
and your verbal submission, and I
wish you a good day. Thank you.
Yeah, thank you very much. Thanks,
Craig.
Bye.
We can hear you. So, uh, David, we,
we've got five minutes, uh, set aside
for your verbal submission.
We've had an opportunity to read your initial submission
plus your supplementary, um,
but you, uh, you use your five minutes as you see fit.
If you can leave some time just towards the end
there for some, uh, questions. Pardon?
Just like, can you speak slowly
because I can't hear you properly,
Slowly. Sorry.
My apologies.
D we've got five minutes, uh, for your verbal submission,
you can start now.
Well, I've sent an email with our ancestors,
uh, that are on there.
We are not ri and there is ri Tim.
That's all I wanted to say. We are Tim alone.
We are not incorporated with, or, or any of them.
They don't to us. Okay.
I sent it, uh, doc a document.
Well, I was hoping that everybody would see that it alone.
We are not. That was because some time ago.
That's all I have to say on that.
Okay. Then I sent A document yesterday
and I hoping that you read that.
And I also wrote something.
I thought, well, I'll write it
because we weren't able to, uh, show you on, on here online,
and I was just advised to send it through in a document.
So I did that. So what I wrote is actually what I was gonna,
was what I wanted to say to you today.
So, uh, just to be clear, the, the supplementary, uh,
that you provided with a picture of, uh, the,
um, genealogy.
The ppa, is that what you're talking about? Yeah.
Was there something else you wish
to provide us as well? Yeah.
Yeah. Okay.
Any, uh, any questions from, uh, any of the members?
Sorry, Sorry.
We're just asking for questions for,
from the members of our panel.
We've got one here from Steve Abel.
Um, um, you,
you support the settlement going ahead,
but you want acknowledgement of the, the name
Tumi as opposed to ri t
We're, we're only, we always have these.
Yep. And they incorporated themselves with us
during the fishery field
or the, that's all I know about that.
I've been opposing this for the last 30 years. Okay.
And we've been trying to get this name removed from us
through our iwi reps, and they have not come.
We had a vote to remove this name.
We've done everything over the years.
Nothing got done about it.
And our negotiator was the iwi rep was supposed to do this.
Okay. That's all I'm saying on this issue.
We've tried a lot to remove the, from that.
I can't, I can't go home.
It's, it's just, I can't even go home,
you know, it's just, I'm locked out.
My children can't go home when they want to.
None of us could go home.
We're told to get lost, but they swear at us.
They tell us, you know, you've got no idea what it's like.
All I want was my home bag and I'm not gonna have it.
Simple as that. They'd be controlling our assets
and everything's been an ongoing thing for, for her
and they don't ever connect to us.
Okay. The land that was I was given
by my grandmother, I can't even go home.
That's how bad it was
Right at the end. Um,
any, any, any other questions from me?
I was just putting my, we're not simple. Yep.
I'm, and that's all the way
She must be her first cousin too.
Okay. Um, well we've actually heard this, uh,
as well from other submitters as well, uh, David.
So don't think that you're the only one that's given us
that message as a, uh, as a committee.
So we've re received that, that message itself.
I'll just call. Are there any, any last, uh,
questions from any other members here?
Doesn't look like, Hey, you've made yourself, uh, loud
and clear, uh, about that, David Dina.
So, uh, we, we receive your written submission
and your verbal submission.
Thank you very much for coming
forward and we appreciate that. I
Truly appreciate you listening to me,
even though I was a bit late. Thank you.
That's alright. I truly,
Well, it's given me a bit of breathing space.
Now I can relax
because we're, we're, look, we only just got hooked
with us about five minutes.
We were all watching tv. That's how we found out
what happened and then suddenly everybody's ringing
us, put permissions on.
So we didn't even know what that was.
But I really appreciate everything
you've done for us. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for coming forward today too.
We appreciate that. Thank you.
Okay, love. Thank you. Bye.